here we go in three two one Rick Baker
ladies and gentlemen how are you sir hey
I'm great Joe everybody's been saying no
my Instagram I should do this podcast
for ages well I'm glad they listened or
you listen brother I've been a fan of
yours forever man I was a huge Star Wars
fan when I was a kid and you inspired me
when I was young I really wanted to be a
makeup artist I wanted to do special
effects and the kind of stuff that you
do I had no idea yeah man I think it was
probably Star Wars that kicked it off
for me because I like many kids a lot of
people today you know we're so removed
with first VHS and then DVDs and laser
discs and now streaming it's so easy to
watch movies but when Star Wars came out
we would go see it over and over and
over again it was like a little contest
between a lot of kids that I went to
school with and I think I saw it 13
times while it was out in the movie
theater but I became fascinated I've
always been fascinated with comic books
always wanted to be a comic book
illustrator and I always loved like like
those fantasy novels like creepy and
eerie you know those those graphic
novels but I really became fascinated
with special effects and particularly
makeup after your work well you know
it's kind of the same thing for me I
mean I you know I I grew up in I was
born in 1950 you know I grew up in front
of a TV but it was a little black and
white one you know and there was always
the monster movies on Saturdays you know
and or Sundays and that just stuff just
hit a chord with me and I just thought I
have to do this you know when did you
what was the first thing that you did
first first ever makeup yeah I did well
I mean you know I was I'm an only child
my mom wasn't supposed to have kids
because she had a bad heart and stuff
and but they wanted children and but I
was very shy I stayed in my bedroom I
couldn't talk to an adult and stuff like
that yeah the very first thing you know
I got interested in makeup and I got
some just white greasepaint and black
greasepaint and smeared it on my face
and just with a layer of grease paint on
my face when I was looking in the mirror
it wasn't a little Ricky Baker anymore
and I could do things that I couldn't do
without this shit smeared on my face
yeah
uh it just it helped me overcome my
shyness but I mean it it started with
that but I mean I but I wanted to do
something more you know so I ended up
making I made my first mask I think when
I was 13 and it was a curse of
Frankenstein Frankenstein and I did that
one mainly because I thought I could
copy that one make it look close enough
because it's it's there's some crudeness
to that makeup I've actually it first
didn't like it but I like it now you
know I mean it's when you find out how
the film industry works and poor Philip
leaky who did that makeup had like a
week to prep you know and no money so I
did I forgive some of the faults with it
well it's great will you stop and think
about the earliest versions of makeup in
movies like special effects style makeup
in movies you know you go back to like
Nosferatu is probably one of the very
earliest right I mean they really didn't
have anything to go with there wasn't
anything to copy they kind of had to
make it up yeah and I mean the you know
the thing is the Nosferatu is such an
Emmy it's a great film it's a great
still to this day yeah and and the look
you know I mean it shouldn't work by all
right you know it's like a big hook nose
you know no but it works great and but
yeah it's same thing I mean lon chaney
had nothing to work with raw spirit gum
and grin and he did to this day someone
still the bit my favorite makeups and
some of the best makeups and I think the
limitations in a lot of ways made the
makeup to work better you know I mean
now we can add so much stuff and I find
that happen so much now like with that
face off show and stuff people it's more
like about how much can you pile on
someone's face you know but sometimes
the most effective makeups are Justin
genius a little bit of things that you
do and a lot of the humanity show
through like launch any and in Phantom
of the Opera a great makeup yeah that's
a terrific and Cheney was just brilliant
and yes I'm great at making scary faces
that's how I learned to make scary faces
watching Cheney movies yeah he's another
one there's like there was not much to
for him to go on there wasn't he was
kind of like a pioneer yeah for sure
and I mean again like I said it's still
some of my favorite makeups that and you
know Jack
Pierce's Frankenstein's monsters yes
again crude materials you know he you
know it was and you know poor Boris
Karloff what he had to endure I mean
that is and isn't
none of the makeups he did on force
we're comfortable you know with cotton
and spirit gum and collodion collodion
or if you know you might know because
you fight background kind of stuff but
it's a plastic that used to use it to
close up
boxers wounds and stuff um it's like
kind of this liquid plastic but it
smells horrible and you know to be
working around someone's eyes with his
fumes of stuff and yeah I mean he'd had
to put up with a lot so it's kind of
like a glue yeah it's kind of a liquidy
plasticky stuff we keep up a video of
Nosferatu what year was that twenty I
don't know nineteen twenty to twenty
that's crazy yeah you stop and think
about that you know film itself had only
been how old then yeah not very yeah you
can get a video of it yeah his just the
whole thing about the way he moved like
everything it was so creepy and
interesting well no whole film him he's
just beautifully shot I mean so many of
those silent films I mean the
photography is so incredible you know I
mean I wonder how what they did with the
fingers like how'd they get his fingers
well those I think those are just his
hands at this point you know I mean
later I mean in in like the John
Barrymore dr. Jekyll and mr. Hyde
mhm you know they'd I remember reading
and Famous Monsters which was again my
like my Bible you know did you get
Famous Monsters at all yeah oh yeah you
said creature you know sure you know
they they said you know John Barrymore
did the whole transformation without
makeup you know and it's not true he's
got finger extensions on right pointed
back of a head you know yeah but yeah
it's nice right - brilliant so what did
they do for his ears do you know well
I'm not sure what they're made out of
same with the bald head I mean I know
rubber existed then I mean you can kinda
see I mean he's got I I think it's
probably just like a slip rubber which
is like a you know he'll what we
Halloween masks are made out of ears and
bald head and nose yeah some sort of
prosthetic nose right yeah and those big
pointy teeth but again I mean with you
if you really kind of analyze
didn't look at it you you think this is
stupid it'll never work you know and but
it works great and I also think it's
because Max Schreck was great yeah does
some really cool things with his hands
and stuff well if you didn't if nothing
like this existed and it was dark out
and you saw a guy like that in your
house you would freak out well you know
that's pretty terrifying what it's not
somebody in my house anyway yeah
someone's smiling with you yeah yeah
it's just it's such an interesting time
capsule when you look at these films and
you look at something like like
Nosferatu from 1922 and then you look at
what we're doing today with CGI in a lot
of ways I mean I'm not a fan of CGI I'm
not a fan of it in terms of like for
monsters month it just seems everything
seems fake there's the suspension of
disbelief is higher than if I'm like
what you did with American Werewolf in
London what one of the one of the more
brilliant things about it was the
special effects and the makeup were
fantastic but they were these really
quick scenes it was like you saw it for
a second it was burned into your eyes
and then and then it vanished yeah with
it what John Landis said to me is that
I'm I'm never gonna really show the
werewolf for more than a couple seconds
mmm you know I hardly even want to show
it then you know right and what was
great about werewolf working on that
film with John Landis was he you know
said you're the expert that I went out
four legged hound from hell I wanted to
make a biped werewolf you know we argued
about it it was basically you know he
wins he's the director you know but he
says before they get home from hell make
it and I did I mean the first sculpture
was what the final thing became same
with everything in it the Nazi demons
all that stuff mmm
you know cut to you know like when I did
the Wolfman I mean it did thousands
designs and and you know all these
producers are going well maybe if you do
one between this and that anyone between
this and that and or maybe this poor
should be over here you know and that
kind of stuff just is so soul sucking
yeah yeah and it's one of the reasons I
retired you know I just it but to this
day I mean like on the cover of my my
book is the sculpture from of the one of
the Nazi demons from American Werewolf
and a number of people said this is like
one of the greatest designs ever you
know this kind of stuff and it's people
were production designers and stuff and
it was it's pure Rick Baker without
right and that's what I thought the
industry would be in right which it
isn't for the most part well it's just
everybody wants to it's the same with
comedy it's the same it seems like it's
the same with everything everybody wants
to put their greasy little finger prints
on it and and say that's the reason why
his nose is like that was me yeah I told
Rick Baker you don't know what you're
doing yeah you got to make the nose
wider yeah no I know that's and it's you
know it's watered watered down the
designs yeah like I said it's all
sucking I mean if and when you know you
know it sculptures take a long time and
you know you said we sculpt every pore
and every wrinkle and everything you
know I have like magnifying glasses I
wear on and doing this and after you
spend you know hours and sleepless
nights doing it and then some guy who
doesn't know what he's talking about
comes in this as well you know why don't
you do this you know well they're
disturbing your artistic vision it was
just it's I mean when someone
contributes money and they're the ones
who get to decide whether things get
made or not made you know just they
think they're artistic as well yeah it
becomes a disaster and it's the thing
you know I mean when you see a movie or
TV show others forty seven producers
yeah you know it used to be they were
show people and it was a guy you know
for example on gremlins - Mike Finnell
who is the producer who came from Roger
Corman school of filmmaking you know so
you really checks every penny and but he
was a guy I could go to and he go what
he would look at everything and go why
is it why is this why you're buying this
and you would explain it to him and you
go okay that makes sense and there'd be
a person you could talk to and you could
get an answer from it now there's like I
said forty-seven producers and nobody
will commit to anything you know it's it
drove me crazy and you know I mean I it
was I I did make it because I loved it
and I was I feel so fortunate that my
hobby he became my profession and he did
well and got Awards for it and stuff and
for something I would do for free you
know but it got to the point where I was
just becoming a bitter old man because
of all this and I just know I have to
retire and I want to make things for
myself
well I still can you know almost 69
years old and you know having trouble
with joints and vision and all kinds of
stuff you know and and I I'd be pissed
off if eyes working on some movie it's a
person producer that
but didn't know what he was talking
about and I screwed up my work you mess
with your head
yeah it's time to just you know make my
own thing and I'm loving it
you know like what kind of stuff are you
doing now I do all kinds of stuff I mean
I I still do makeups you know for fun
I've actually cast up some of my own
I've saved all the molds I cast up some
of the old Star Wars stuff animals and
stuff and I've do animations I make
models I make little movies but you're
just doing it purely for the joy of it
painting and sculpting it's just like it
was when I was a kid
nice Muslim my bedroom was my workshop
you know I and it you know I'm surprised
and still alive you know I was I had a
bunch of toxic chemicals in the same
room that I slept you know and but it's
you know it's what I've done since I was
a kid is how I have fun is how I
entertain myself you know and and like I
said on my Instagram everybody's going
you know I thought you retired and I
said I retired from the film industry I
didn't retire from being a creative guy
I mean this is who I am this is what I
do
it's how I have fun that's awesome you
know as much as the process was probably
annoying with the Wolfman the end result
was cool I really loved how you did it
and you made it old-school it was kind
of like almost like the original Wolfman
but like read you know redone yeah well
I was a fan yeah and and you know and I
think it's I think that - I mean people
who love what they're doing and to come
up from a fanboy point of view you know
it's and it's something I think that
producers don't understand because
they're all about making as much money
as they can and they think everybody's
trying to cheat them out of money and
stuff you know it's like there's so many
times I would say you know why did you
hire me you know be if you don't you're
not letting me do what I do right and
it's like well you're the best like what
let me do what I thought may be the best
have some faith you know I mean you're
making it so I can't and the Wolfman was
a case like that I mean it was a battle
through the whole thing and that was one
of these things with thousands of
designs and changed this one thing but I
thought that you know in the end the
original director left right before we
started filming they brought somebody
else in and I just said we don't have an
approved design I'm making what I
thought I should make seven months ago I
did a test on myself that basically
looked like that we don't have time to
screw around
new director isn't gonna have a choice
which I don't think he was really happy
about but in the end I mean I thought
you know that movie was a closest thing
to an old-school horror movie in a long
time it was but it also had the feel
like a lot of people fucked with it it
felt like it was missing an individual
or singular vision well it's every movie
now yeah that's so frustrating to hear
well I think Tarantino still pulls it
off oh yeah yeah no I mean he's a rare
guys that still you you watch a movie
and go Jesus Christ like the shit that
he gets away with that's a Tarantino
movie like Once Upon a Time in Hollywood
that is a Tarantino movie there's not
like if you told us all that movie and
you said who made that movie I'd be
fucking Tarantino that movie if they
didn't they're going to jail he gets
away with so much in his movies seem
like his movies and he's a family you
know he knows movies really well yeah
and no I mean thank God for him you know
I mean I really enjoy his films and it's
I met Quentin I was at a film festival
in CJIs Spain it's a science fiction
fantasy film festival as a guest and I
was there that's where I met Peter
Jackson we actually he sat next to me in
a screening and we became friends and
and he had his movie brain dead have you
ever seen that no oh it's really good
yeah our Lee fun it's really gory but
funny gory and really clever but anyway
see when did he make that well this was
like in the 90s or something I guess I
I'm real bad with dates you know but
anyways we were sitting and talking and
and Freddy Francis who was a director
and a director of photography for did a
lot of Hammer movies and and stuart
freeborn was there ever sit in this
thing and there was a big kind of goofy
kid walking around you know and and I
thought he was just like a fan so I said
come on over and sit down with us you
didn't only started talking and go what
are you doing here and you know he was
obviously like an American he goes I
have a film here you know and it was
Reservoir Dogs and we went to see it and
I actually left in the scene where
they're torturing the cop it's funny
people think I like gory gory stuff you
know because I've done it in films but
real stuff and if it's really intensely
done on a film like that was mmm I mean
I thought he was gonna let this guy
light this guy on fire
that he's and where he's got the cop in
a chair at one point I said I can't I
don't want to see this so I left and so
did Wes Craven Wow yeah and we went and
he got so jazzed by that you know Wes
Craven couldn't take my movie and Rick
Baker couldn't take my movie is so cool
ya know it was and that was a great
thing I mean like I said I was my
introduction to Peter Peter Jackson and
we became fast friends we kind of had
the same background it's like you what
you said to me about wanting to be
makeup artist and reading those things I
know so many people like that you know
you know Danny Elfman we said that to me
oh yeah John Fogerty likes that yeah I
don't they wanted to be makeup rest but
he really likes like that stuff you know
slash you know a lot of these a lot of
these different people and you know and
they went into rock and roll instead of
that you know and but you know I never
veered off that path I mean from from
age 10 this is what I wanted to do and I
didn't have a plan B and fortunately it
worked because I I grew up very lower
middle class and you know wasn't in it
didn't know anybody in the film industry
you know and when I finally met somebody
I was 13 and Universal Studios just
started their tours and I talked my
parents they said you know you're gonna
be a teenager it's a special birthday
you know what can we do you know and I
said can we go to Universal on the
universal tour you know and in my head I
was gonna hop off the tram and run into
the makeup department and they were
gonna hire me you know but on the way I
knew that are you familiar with Don
Post's masks the dump Oh Studios they
did a universal classic monster masks
they were in the back of Famous Monsters
and stuff okay but they did these really
high-quality masks that were like $35 in
the 60s which was way beyond anything I
could ever afford but everybody every
kid monster kid coveted with those masks
you know and he his studio was in
Burbank near Universal and I had seen
him on TV talking about how he was
biting Universal so long he got close
that's my dad if he could maybe look in
the phone book and maybe call up Don
post and we could go a visit and they
were very gracious you know my dad is
sending to my son Ricky likes monsters
he makes masks and we're in close by can
you come by and they said sure you know
gave me the whole tour Wow
yeah and on the wall in Don post Studios
was a picture of Bob Burns who I had
read about in my monster magazine see
he's a collector and he's done some
makeup you had a mummy suit and a
gorilla suit that he made and and had
his phone number and I wrote it down and
I again been I was still pretty shy and
I got my dad to call this guy who I read
about in monster magazines and he was
the first guy I ever met in any anywhere
related to the industry and again very
Bob and Kathy you know welcomed me into
their home he told me you know he showed
me how to do a scar out of a cutout of
Martin's wax and where to get the stuff
and Max Factor and and he just was like
one of the first people to show me stuff
and he worked at the local CBS station
and introduced me to the news the guy
who did the news men the makeup artist
pseudonym made up the newscasters and he
was like blown away by the stuff that I
did he goes I'm gonna take you to the
makeup union and it was like 15 at this
point and so I went to the makeup union
with a box full of heads and masks and
make pictures of makeups I did again
naive thinking that they were gonna say
start tomorrow
yeah the job and the business rep of the
union said you know give up kid you're
never gonna get in you know that you
have to be born into the industry it was
a real at that time at that time there
was a lot of nepotism I mean there's
still dad to add yeah but he says you
know if you were her Westmore you know
you would get a union card with your
birth certificate yeah old man but
nobody knows you know know anybody
you're not can he said first of all you
have to be 21 to serve an apprenticeship
Elvis 15 he said there's gonna there's
only a few apprenticeships and they're
gonna go to a West more to a Bauer you
know somebody who was a named makeup
artist or a relative right and he also
said the kind of makeups that I wanted
to do which were monsters and
good stuff you say that those jobs are
few and far between and most of the time
you're gonna be mopping sweat off of
some bitchy actress hmm and it was kind
of like trying to crush your dreams well
he kind no it kind of did but it also
was like you know what fuck you I'm
gonna show you and and I did definitely
did I mean boy was he wrong
yeah turned out to be the greatest of
all time yeah well I don't know about
that I think dick Smith is the greatest
of all time but well you have to think
that I can't believe you didn't get the
book I'm sorry I'm gonna make sure well
there's a there's a picture immediate
Wow
that was from a newspaper article in my
local newspaper oh and I think it was a
sophomore in high school
and that was the first time they called
me Rick Baker monster maker yeah that
was that's from high school that was
yeah I was think I was the third no I
must have been like 14 or 15 or 16
something like wow man you were
committed to the path oh I mean my
bedroom had it was all masks and you
know of the roar did you ever do the
roar of model kids yes
yeah dad yeah yeah I mean that was one
of the big regrets that oh when I got
married I thought well I got it
grow up yeah you know really models I
got rid of the models I've regretted it
ever since those were so cool you paint
him I remember those I think I had a I
think I had a Creature from the Black
Lagoon one did they make a creature yeah
yeah that was that was an interesting
film right because that was a that was a
unique turn on makeup where they took
this guy and they kind of put him in
sort of like a scuba suit slash
reptilian thing that was one of the
cooler makeup works for the time it
still is it's still the best man in the
sea yeah really well done
pull that up Jamie Creature from the
Black Lagoon that was like what was it
50s yeah and if that was the West more
regime Jack Pierce who did Frankenstein
the Wolfman all the classic stuff was
used old-school techniques during the
time when other people were doing foam
rubber and a new regime came in
Universal and all of a sudden a jacket a
pink slip you know you're you're out you
know these movies yeah very cool yeah go
go with the larger one in the lower left
corner
Jamie what you see the whole body yeah I
mean what
cool design it is and it was designed by
a woman
Millicent Patrick who she nailed it she
did but she didn't get a lot of I mean
Bud West whores regime got the credit
for when the movie came out with some
that yeah
when some publicist found out that a
woman designed it it was they did a
whole kind of Beauty and the Beast
campaign and apparently bud Westmore was
furious you know he goes it's my work
it's and he was he was famous for posing
with other people's stuff you know I
mean a very fine sculptor named Chris
Muller sculpted the creatures head
anyways and I think he did the abdomen
and some of the parts and he also
desculpe the metal oni mutant from this
island earth you know the big yeah and
there's a there's some pictures of Budd
Westmore holding a really inappropriate
sculpture tool next to the sculpture and
from what I heard he would
whenever the publicist would come to
take pictures he let give everybody a
day off for the afternoon off and then
he would go up to the lab and pose what
that's so disappointing you know when
you want to think that all these people
who take credit for all that work they
did the work yeah and I tried to do that
and it's funny because you know so many
people mean I never wanted to be
businessman you know and I never even
thought about that aspect of it you know
that I'd have to have employees and all
that you know I mean either and I hated
that I didn't I mean that was something
I didn't care for you know and I
resisted being a business man I didn't
have I wasn't listed anywhere my company
wasn't listed I didn't have a letterhead
I didn't have business cards how the
hell I don't didn't have an agent you
know how the hell I ever was successful
I don't know other than that fact that I
worked hard and my work was pretty good
you know yes unfortunately I don't work
down for me like I said certainly did
what was your first gig like what was
the first first professional gig that
you got where it was like holy shit I'm
getting paid to do makeup well I mean
the first time I ever got paid actually
did I think I did a a makeup for a stage
actor who wanted to be old and
I charged him $75 and which was you know
more money than I ever gotten from
anything before like I said just came up
with a number in your head yeah well I
kind of somehow figured it out no but
anyways I did these pieces for him and
he lived off that Pasadena Freeway that
one it has a weird right angled off
ramps you know and my dad drove me there
because they couldn't I didn't drive at
the time and and he actually had a
makeup kit and had some hair pieces in
it a bunch of stuff and he said you know
I will trade you this instead of giving
you $75 I'll give you this makeup case
and with the pull of this stuff and I
was like yeah that's really cool you
know but my dad wanted to teach me you
know responsibilities and stuff and this
was around the time I I think I was like
16 and was gonna try to drive and he
goes you're my insurance is gonna go up
and what you have to do is you have to
get that money and you have to give me
the money to for the rate of the
insurance that's going up it's like oh
man I really want this makeup kit no but
but I mean I had amazing parents who I
mean I wouldn't have been I wouldn't be
Who I am if it wasn't for them I mean
that's cool they supported me it Mike's
crazy
decision to make monsters for a living
well they must have been so happy when
it paid off though yeah I was glad that
they live long enough to see that and I
got to bring my parents to the Oscars if
you talk oh wow and you know they were
they were very proud and and you know it
was funny because I mean I had like my
mom's brother and my uncle would you
know say stuff like you know witness
Ricky gonna stop doing this silly stuff
and do something can make a living at
you know yeah all those people but you
know my dad basically never grew up and
I knew I never was going to you know
what was your dad what'd he do for a
living well he did a bunch of different
things he was a high school dropout
because he he had to help his family his
his mother and father are gonna pay
bills and he had a variety of not very
good jobs you worked at Sears as a
salesman you drove a truck he did stuff
but he was always he was very creative
and it was kind of held down in his
lifetime you know don't do that you
can't write you know do something and
make a living serious and because of
that I benefited from
he supported the creativity and when I I
think I was a sophomore in high school
he decided he wanted to try to make a
living as an artist and we lived on my
mom's bank teller salary for a number of
years he hardly made any money at all
but he was happy you know and and he
because I mean like I said he supported
my creativity and he was really my first
teacher he he - ah showed me what you
could do with pain he knew a little bit
about sculpture you know he he was also
a fan of monster movies you know and he
saw you know the Fred of March dr.
Jekyll and mr. Hyde when it came out you
know and told me all about it and that
was a movie that they didn't have on TV
I really wanted to see you know and he
said when he saw it in the theaters you
know he wouldn't hide his eyes or hide
by the seat you know and I so wanted to
see that and and he also said you know
War of the Worlds the George Powell oh
yeah that was so cool then the sound
effects were great and you know that was
never on either end when I was in the
seventh grade I think it was I decided
to get on the student council for the
main reason this is my plan was I was
suggested that we could raise money for
the school by having showing movies
after school we could rent 16 Miller
movie 16 millimeter movies and show them
and charge admission and I basically
just went through all the movies ahead
and seemed I wanted to see you and got
those you know and there were maybe four
or five people that showed up to see him
but I was happy yeah
what was the first film that you did
special effects for first film was a
film called the octo man and it's kind
of a cult classic because it's such a
crappy movie you know it was shot in ten
days at it all it Bronson Canyon and in
Griffith Park well there was a night I
see I graduate I'm high school 1969 and
I went to two years to a junior college
69 70 71 I guess it was so you went from
that to Star Wars only like five or six
years later right yeah something like
that yeah that's crazy
yeah and King Kong and you know yeah
there's the octoman yeah don't matter
I didn't design oh my goodness look at
that yeah but I mean this was I was a
full-time student I had six weeks and
like I think a thousand dollars to make
this suit and so I after school I and I
got my friend the very first job I ever
had actually this and this again
happened because of my dad when he was a
truck driver delivering plumbing
supplies he went to the wrong building
in the building he went into was called
Chloe productions and they made Gumby
and David Goliath
stop-motion animation which I did
stop-motion is well big Ray Harryhausen
fan you know and for some reason I grew
up in Covina which is east of you know
LA like 30 or 40 miles and wasn't and
there was anything film related out
there but for some reason Clos Keyes was
out there um I think because it was
cheaper rent and he III was my on my
quarter a week allowance when I found a
place I could buy rubber it was like
eight almost nine dollars for a quarter
rubber in you know it took me a lot of
weeks and a lot of more lawns and a lot
of stuff to save up that money and I
said I need to I need a job so I I
didn't have a car we only had one car in
the family and you know I went to any
place I could walk to supermarkets you
know Busboys all this stuff nobody
wanted me and my dad said well I
remember this place and did stop-motion
and you'd stop motion you know maybe so
I went there with my box of stuff you
know and and it was summer vacation
between my junior and senior year of
high school and they said start tomorrow
got paid minimum wage which I think was
you know a dollar twenty-five or
something at the time but that place was
like a magnet for any weird kid or
anything there was like a stop-motion
fan any stop-motion person would show up
there one point or another and I met
this guy named Doug Bezeq who was a few
years older than me and we became again
fast friends you know he read Famous
Monsters he was a ray harryhausen fan
and Doug when I did this on this octoman
film Doug had a little workshop and we
did it in his workshop we did it
together Wow
but yeah it was a and it was a real
introduction in the film industry
because it was the very first days
filming
I'm filming in Bronson Canyon Griffith
Park we show up we went in Doug's 57
Chevy it had an octa man in the backseat
you know and we show up there and
looking around and there's nobody there
and what the hell you know so and this
is you know before cellphones and all
that shit so we'd have to go we went
back down the hill down Bronson Canyon
to like there was a market there and a
payphone called the production office
and it was like oh yeah we pushed one
day we just forgot to tell you you know
a movie called the octoman you forgot to
tell the people who are making the
octoman the title character of the movie
that you weren't filming you know and it
was also I mean they that's a perfect
introduction to the movie industry
though oh it was in and I learned that
that you know that you can't believe
anything they tell you you know I mean
it was designed by somebody else and I
got this job handed down through people
I met at Khloe's it was going to be
stop-motion at one point they decided
that was too expensive they're gonna
make a suit and the first thing I did
was a little maquette and a little what
Mehcad has got a small sculpture of the
design but I said there's because he had
they tried to figure out how they could
do eight tentacles on a man mmm and his
feet kind of like turned into tentacles
and it kind of split off and into a back
tentacle but I said I think they look
like elf shoes in it and there's not a
good way for me to join the two things
together and and it's like kid don't
worry about it there's only gonna be one
shot of the octoman in the movie where
you actually see it the rest of the time
is this gonna be a shadow or a glimpse
you know but we'll have a money shot
where you can you know make sure it
looks great the movie starts out with a
close above his feet you know basically
you know then and you know it was Marill
introduction I I thought it was going to
be like working on a hate mail Herman
Miller meaner movies like I did as a kid
you know Iran just jumps in and we're
making a movie let's do it right yeah
wasn't that and the DP the director of
photography
cuz I had long hair and Doug had long
hair he called us the girls this was at
a time when Harris you know get the
girls to get their silly monster suit
out you know correct
but we there was a if you can believe
this the octoman was written by the guy
that was the writer of creature and
black lagoon and he also wrote it came
from outer space ah so it was basically
those two scripts combined with Eveleth
ecology thrown in and he we you know it
was like there's this day where they
instead of in you know in the creature
they put a log across the lagoon and
they can't get out you know here it was
a log across the street and they're
driving it and Winnebago and they can't
get out they get out to try to get the
log out and they open the window beg a
door and the hawk demands in there and
he knocks a guy down and then they're
supposed to I think I supposed to pick
up a log and throw it at the hawk demand
and I go you know where's the prop log
that we're gonna use and and and you
know because was that it's that and I go
that's it's a tree limb you know I got
it that's gonna hurt the guy in the suit
and it's gonna hurt the suit you know
and I go and we we're gonna rehearse
this right because no we don't have time
to rehearse it and I go oh when he
knocked man supposed to bend over and
pick up the pier Angeli who was the
female lead who killed herself after
this movie can tell you what how good
the movie was you know I said when he
goes to pick her up
let's cut there because if you cut I can
wrap the tentacles around her no look
more like he's holding her you know so
anyways they start filming without
rehearsing octoman opens the door and
knocks a guy down I picked the blog
throws it the octoman hits him rips the
suit he goes walking over and he's
virtually blind he's looking out at two
little holes out this far away you know
it was a real claustrophobic suit the
poor guy Reed Morgan who play the occu
man was great to deal with but it was
very hard suit to wear goes to pick up
here Anjali nobody says cut so he picks
her up so walking around the guy who
knocked Underground's laying on the
ground spread-eagle he ends up stepping
right on his nuts
Oh falls over backwards throws pier
Angeli opposed against the Winnebago oh
she's crying says he wants her mother
that guy's holding her nuts you know
broke his hand cuz the log fell on his
hand and everybody screaming I'm going
to rip my soup no no we lost a day out
of our 10-day shooting schedule so Harry
Essex who was the dress
and writer I was tearing pages of the
script like just we don't need this we
don't need this we don't need this
and then when they tried to make a movie
out of it it made no sense I mean I
think of the first 20 minutes our stock
footage if you know in the beginning
there was nothing and then you know then
there was slime and then you know the
whole I can't wait to watch it
there's a I think it's in public domain
now I think it's on YouTube but there's
a blu-ray out of it I might have to fire
up a joint watch that one now
when you when you look back on that you
mean it's gotta be kind of even though
it sounds like a clusterfuck it seems
like it's kind of a fond memory as well
because that was where it started it was
you got to see how much nonsense there
is in the movie industry but you also
got a chance to get going yeah and and I
got you know we we came up with a way to
do this because we couldn't it's a foam
rubber suit and former president baked
in an oven we didn't have a big oven we
didn't have the mean so we we came up
with a clever solution and that's what I
had to do so many times in films do
things that people hadn't done before
and a budget and schedule you know and
and try to figure out and that's part of
the fun yeah but what was cool about the
octoman the male lead was Kerwin
Matthews who was Sinbad in the Sun for
just in bed okay I get a Ray Harryhausen
film I was yeah big fan of you know so
one of the first things I had to do
there's a scene where the octo man's
tentacle supposed to creep through this
cave opening and they basically wadded
up some tar paper and I stood behind the
tar paper in Bronson caves and stuck my
hand in his tentacle and it did this and
when Kerwin walked by I said super
dynamesh which is what Ray Harryhausen's
technique he called for a few films and
ago you know about that you know so I
thought that was really cool my kids
found out about Harry Hill's and from
Monsters Inc uh-huh and they were like
who's that harry houses yeah and i said
well he's the guy that made all the
early monster movies and so then we sat
down and we watched King Kong together
then they were scared at first like oh
my god I'm scared but they started
laughing when they saw King Kong the
stop-motion yeah I mean it's it's today
in comparison to you know even
comparison to your version of King Kong
when you could you know make it
mechanized and
you know it's just it's it's amazing
when you think about how far we came but
you know the yes the stop motion and and
Harry hasn't didn't animate on King Kong
he did mighty Joe Young
but King Kong was what inspired him
that was Willis O'Brien and and Pete
Peterson know where the animators on
that but he did the was the the one the
one with Medusa
did he do that one huh Harry Hudson yeah
yeah Clash of the Titans right that was
him right well I can and Ray was a
one-man show you know and stop-motion
you know it's 24 frames a second you
know himself all himself and when you're
animating seven Scott and Jason the
Argonauts there's seven skeletons
fighting seven rise he did all that I'm
saw himself and I became I became
friends with Ray Wow and I would save
them and this was during the time when
computer stuff was starting out you know
and you know his movies were 50,000
dollar movies you know you know the
whole bunch of the movie you know not
just as effects in the early ones that
he did you know and I said you know it
doesn't it piss you off that now they
get millions of dollars and there's
hundreds of people working on stuff that
you did by yourself you know and well
they could never take away the legacy
though no even though he did it all but
he him he was not just a groundbreaker
but he's the guy when you think about
stop make stop motion films and horror
films he's the guy that you think and
you pull up Jason in the Argonaut
skeleton scene I can't believe he did
that all himself I mean that's a very
very detailed and intricate scene no cuz
you have to match what they were doing
yeah I mean and you know you're in a
room by yourself and you know moving up
you know fraction of an inch a puppet at
a time you know and it takes whatever
you know and I mean having if you've
never done stop-motion appreciated oh my
god what year was this I'm not sure
exactly
and look they pop out of the ground yeah
it's a great bernard herrmann music in
this you know he always had the terrific
scores in his in his films as well you
know and again he was a fan
who made a living doing something that
he loved you know and and imagine being
the actors and having to sort of respond
to all this yeah to these skeletons that
are popping out of the ground with
shields and swords which aren't there
would you
yeah and which you know it can came you
know months later yeah okay you've seen
the skeleton now yeah you're scared he's
going to take your soul well Ray would
kind of direct those scenes because in
most directors don't know what to do
with that kind of story you know yeah
but he was and you know what I thought
was great about Ray is like so many
artists you know aren't appreciated till
after they're gone you know who Ray saw
the impact he had I mean I went to his
90th birthday celebration in in in
England where the the British Film
Academy did this great tribute to Ray
and everybody showed up I mean Peter
Jackson came you know people who didn't
show up sent video Steven Spielberg's in
a video Jim Cameron did all talking
about how much Ray's films and Ray's
work influenced them and it was really
great you know and is so nice that he
was able to be appreciated like that in
his lifetime and and now I'm actually I
mean the funny thing is I'm getting that
now with this with my book that's come
out people are just going oh my god
you're I love you so much and this stuff
have you done it's just you know it's
nice to know that you you know I served
a purpose you served a giant purpose and
you served a big purpose in my life man
like I said I'm such a huge fan of your
work and when you look back like what
was the first thing that you did were
you like okay that was a good one well
you know it's funny once you do of
something and you look at it you see all
the things are wrong with it you know
and and I always say I wish I could see
the film before I make this stuff
because so many times the thing that's
supposed to be the most important thing
just isn't in something that you like
threw together is all of a sudden the
most important thing mmm I mean I I mean
American Werewolf was probably the one
horror I mean that's one that really put
me on the map I mean a lot people say
King Kong was but American Werewolf you
know I looked at it and I thought well
that's pretty cool you know but I also a
god I wish we did this and I wish I do
it you know it didn't do that you know
and I see so many things that I would do
differently now that movies a
masterpiece what it's a great film and
it's a great film I mean an i my second
film was schlock which was john Landis's
first film
and I was 20 and he was 21 and I had
again I had six weeks and I think I had
$1,000 again to make John played the
schlock throught this I don't know if
you've ever seen no never saw nother one
you're gonna watch low-budget you know
movie shot by a kid basically you know
with a you know and he like I said he
played this it was based have you ever
seen Trog yeah Joan Crawford yeah yes he
saw Trog and couldn't believe that they
made this movie so he was making like a
joke a joke version of schlock you know
and he wanted to play this ape-man
character and it's like well okay you
know but you're gonna be the director
too so you know he had to be unset at
6:00 in the morning whether
slok worked or not all made up you know
and it was shot in three weeks in John
and I were going on to our sleep at
night you know he I would make him up we
were out in Agora where it used to be an
Oakwood school where John went for a
while on think it was thrown out of and
we lived and worked in this like
screened-in patio that was left over in
this dilapidated building and I was
making up John on a barstool and
eventually he was like falling asleep
doing those you know that thing you know
and I'd have to grab him but he for some
reason they were doing the daily set at
MGM so we would have to go from after
12-hour day of filming and you know our
removing the makeup we'd get in a car
drive to MGM look at the previous day's
dailies try back sleep for two hours get
up start again oh my god and it was
during a heat wave in Agora
and the first day John had the suit on
all day and I was like combing and
brushing it in the hair was just falling
out in handfuls and I went oh my god did
my my second film in my career is over I
would stand up on my hair director
trying to dry the suit how it's like a
glue more hair on it you know but it's
it's it's actually kind of a cool makeup
in in in in kind of a fun character you
know and John had already written
American Werewolf and he said my next
films going to be an American world for
you wrote that by the time he was 21 he
was 21 you wrote it Wow and he goes it's
gonna be my next film and he said I want
to do a transformation in a way that
never
done before it doesn't make sense to me
that a man changing in his body going
through this metamorphosis would sit in
a chair like Lon Chaney jr. and be still
until he finished changing because I
think it would be painful and I want him
to be able to move and I want to show
the pain and you know how would you do
that no fucking idea but I would love to
know because we both love those
transformation scenes you know pull that
transformation scene up the initial
transformation scene is so fucking
awesome because I remember seeing it in
the theater what year was this in 1981 I
think okay so it's 14 years old I was in
high school and I remember seeing this
in the movie theater and this was
another one that sort of cemented the
idea that I wanted to be a makeup artist
when he pulls all his clothes off and
he's burning up and then he looks at his
hand his hand starts stretching out like
that was incredible well this was just
such a different werewolf to like
everything about it was different yeah
well again and I credit John for that
and he also said you know I want to do
it in a brightly lit room it's not gonna
happen like it's gonna be real you know
how did you do this you know we call it
a change Oh hand it's actually a fake
hand we storyboarded the whole sequence
and that's a different fake hand there
that's the second one right and that's
another one there it's got syringes in
it that we pump now he's wearing an
appliance and it matches that see um and
we store you bird of the whole sequence
and as you saw when David first took off
his clothes he's not very hairy right
and I said for me to glue a little bit
of hair on and then we do him a little
hairier and a little hairier it's better
for us to work in Reverse let me do him
in the hairiest first now pull hair off
and trim it Oh interesting yeah but we
boarded the whole thing out so in this
hair growing was reverse I punched her
through rubber and then pulled it
through and we printed it so look oh
this is a whole fake back again with
things coming out of it that's it so you
punched hair through over and pulled it
through and then reversed it Wow
but what I we thought what would be the
most impactful thing would be for his
face to change last but what I don't
like about the transformation like here
the wolf has a big mane of hair so he's
got this big
a neck that I don't like you know and
it's you know that's David doesn't have
lenses and his eyes were just read from
that was a ten-hour day of makeup so
just exhausted yeah yeah this was
incredible man that's crazy that he
doesn't have any eyes he doesn't know
anything in his eyes
that's just his eyes yeah holy shit um
but yeah this is the first stage change
Oh head so this is a rubber head that
had mechanisms that push it out you know
and this is the second stage change our
head it just stretches out like that the
thing that was interesting because I
mean I I was 30 when we did this it was
at a time when there weren't people that
did this kind of work they're just a few
in Hollywood do you know like John
Chambers who did Planet of the Apes
but for me to find a crew I hired kids
that didn't me fanmail I was a kid a kid
from Texas that sent me fan mail another
kid from Connecticut and they were like
18 Wow I mean I had a crew of like
basically 18 year olds in me it was like
I think six of us and who did this film
you know thirty however many years ago
I'm not good at math it still looks
pretty decent he's fucking awesome not
just pretty decent I mean there's a
reason why I have the American Werewolf
the Pat McGee version of it sitting
there in the front yeah but now I have
to call Pat and tell him the legs are
off what's wrong with the leg there too
stretched out and too long it but you
know we actually that was the problem
cuz I didn't know how he's going to make
this four-legged wolf from work yeah and
I thought well I'll figure out something
and it came to me one night I thought I
remember as a kid you ever do that
wheelbarrow race thing when somebody
holds your feet you're walking on your
hands you know I thought well if we do
something like that and have like
puppeteered legs in the back so if the
reality is if you really see the full
wolf
there's feet sticking out of his ass
he's got two legs sticking out but we
had him like on a platform with wheels
and the back legs were puppeteered with
little rods you know so you never you
know the back and the back legs come in
that's when you cut you know right right
and a lot of this stuff like in
Piccadilly Circus in the big bus crash
and yes that's me in a wheelchair with a
where they had which on pushing me down
the street wow that was a great scene
god that was a great scene yeah boy
werewolf comes bursting out of the the
the point of a yeah which divides the
guy in the head that script I think was
the only script that I've worked on my
entire career that the script that I
read was basically the script we made
the only difference was when John wrote
the script originally that arrows the
cinema in in Piccadilly Circus was at
cartoon cinema and in the original
script was a cartoon cinema but when we
got there it was a porno cinema so he
changed that scene you know to a porno
cinema other than that it's the say the
script is basically verbatim when he
wrote as a 20 year old and his use of
music and everything was groundbreaking
at the time people didn't do like the
way he did you know and his friend that
kept returning Jack more or more and
more rotten every time like that was a
genius idea as well like that Jack had
explained to him when I came in you got
to kill yourself you're a werewolf
you're gonna kill a bunch people yeah
like oh so everything about it was so
unique it was a it it completely flipped
the whole idea of what a werewolf movie
was on its head yeah and and it worked
you know and Griffin who played Jack
when I first made him up in that makeup
he as I was putting the stuff on you
know in the makeup chair he's kind of
like getting more and more sad and like
sinking down on the chair and and it's
like what's wrong Griffin is something
wrong and he goes look at me
yeah yeah he goes look at me it isn't my
big break and I mean I mean my throats
torn out and I mean nobody's gonna look
at me you know and it's like did you
read the script yeah didn't it say your
throat was torn out yeah good but I
didn't I didn't think it would look like
this and I did you know and that's what
John thought he was bummed out well he
was at first you know because it is it's
disturbing to see you know yeah but it's
a great role yeah I don't know and he
was brilliant and he was terrific to
work with you know but the initial shock
I've seen himself torn up right was it
was hard for him to take you know so
realistic yeah but he but he would you
know I thought okay I gotta call John
was in England already scouting
locations and so I said you know you got
to talk to Griffin he's you know kind of
upset about what he looks like you know
but you know I took that opportunity
being a sensitive guy that I am to tell
him that the third part of his
transformation was
it was actually gonna be a puppet it
wasn't even really gonna be him because
he was supposed to become basically
talking skeleton right I know and the
makeup process is an additive process
and and you know he would have to be a
huge skull to look right you know and he
wasn't too happy about that either but I
said but I want you to operate the mouth
because you're doing the lips sink you
know you're doing the voice you know so
he operated the puppet but he he turned
out to be a great guy you know and and
and he I thought he was bringing in the
film and the whole film you know the
film is amazing and it's funny too
that's one of the things that's
interesting about the film it's like
it's silly but horrific like the
violence and the the the explosive
scenes of the werewolf or ripping people
apart but then some of it is hilarious
well that host sequence in the porno
theater with all the detail of bloody
play I mean when we were when we were
filming it I was kind of going yeah it
was a welcomed sort of comic relief from
the graphic horror of the the werewolf
tearing people apart yeah yeah and you
know it's I think it's a brilliant film
it it's annoying foam and it changed my
life I mean I got my first Oscar for
that film you know and and I mean so
fortunate to me that that Shawn came
into my life and this this happened
again because at Don post Studios that I
talked about or I they made the
Halloween masks John was a mail boy at
Fox for a while and he knew John
Chambers he would deliver mail to the
John Chambers who did the Planet of the
Apes makeup and he talked to John
Chambers at first about doing schlock
and John said well I need you know
250,000 dollars in the budget of the
whole film I think was thirty thousand
dollars you know so he I think he
basically didn't want to deal with this
hyperactive kid yeah and so he sent him
to Don post Studios and dime post you
know said well same thing they didn't
really want to deal with his kid and and
they had it would be way too much money
you know right but they said there's a
kid who comes in here and buy his
material I used to go there to buy
materials because in those days now
there are stores that sell all the
supplies that you need right did I used
to have to drive all over California to
get what I need
stuff they would only sell you in a
55-gallon drum which I couldn't afford
you know like polyurethane polyurethane
foam which is a two-part foam that forms
out chemical reaction forms it up makes
cyanide gas when it forms which nobody
told me but Don post would you know poor
Simon it can you go here you go kid you
know on first time I used it my bedroom
I practically died really yeah and I
have a real strong I it I have a very
strong allergic reaction to it now and
because of that yeah
Wow I mean my throat closed up I could
hardly breathe in whoa and you didn't
know what was going on and I found out
what it was but darling cyanide Jesus
yeah but because of that because I left
that that's the only time my life
actually had a business card and John
says you know it said Rick Baker monster
maker but I think it's a trick Baker
makeup artist you know but I gave a card
and some pictures to DOM post and when
they were trying to get rid of this kid
who wanted a flunkey gorilla suit thing
you know they said well this guy's made
some gorilla suits why don't you talk to
him and John lived in Westwood near the
cemetery there the veteran cemetery he
drove out to Covina and again I was
still pretty shy at a point in my
bedroom at that point was you know I had
I slept on a convertible sofa because I
had gotten enough money to buy one so I
could fold it up and have more floor
space to work but my masks had work
tables everywhere are you knowing and
john is very loud and and and and and
hyperactive and and he was coming in and
he was flipping out over the stuff that
I made you know and like touching it and
stuff and I'm going scaring me yeah but
I mean thank God I mean American
Werewolf you know put me on the map and
I mean I did coming to America and Eddie
Murphy was you know being I did a lot of
films with Eddie and because of John
actually met my wife Sylvia on John
Landis film where he had me play
originally it was a Jesus Freak it was a
film called into the night and it was
all filmed at night and met my wife on
Hollywood Boulevard in front of
Frederick's of Hollywood in the middle
of night and turned out I mean change it
to a dope dealer I was playing a dope
dealer and Sylvia was the hair stylist
on the film
and John came in and says I want you to
be in the movie I want you to play the
part you were born to play a hooker my
wife was a hooker in the background you
know and there's a picture of us it's in
the book actually on the night we met
Frederick's of Hollywood yeah that's
cool and now we have two amazing
children and a great life
well you and John made magic he really
did
I mean that movie was so good you know
and as we said one of the things about
that film is it's it was so strategic in
its use of the werewolf hmm you know
that you you do really when you got a
chance to see it like one of my favorite
scenes was when the guy the businessman
is in the subway he's running away from
the werewolf and you know it's chasing
him but you don't see it you don't see
it until he's stumbling on the escalator
and then you see it at the bottom of the
escalator just walking into the fridge
just walking of the frame and you're
like fuck yeah and they cut right before
you see his feet sticking out is that
yes well that was something with the
design of the world was well because
because John said he wasn't gonna show
it I normally you would when you do
something that's going to be an
animatronic Eric you've kind of sculpted
in a neutral position and you let the
mechanism make the expressions but from
my experience in other films the editor
doesn't necessarily choose the moment
where you think it's the best expression
you know and I thought if it's only
going to be on for a second I want it to
be scary-looking
so I sculpt it in a scary expression on
it which normally wouldn't do I just so
there was no way that it wasn't gonna
look scary right snarling yeah well is
that was that the case with the cantina
scene in Star Wars because the Star Wars
scene there's that's that's a crazy
scene because you've got so many
characters in that scene and today when
you go back and look at it like it's
pretty cheesy yeah yeah yeah well I that
came about originally the you know film
was done in England nobody knew Star
Wars was gonna be Star Wars you know
Stuart Freeborn was the makeup artist in
the film he did the Wookiee he did the
cantina scene originally but George
wanted to embellish on it and didn't
like a lot of the stuff that he did so
at ILM which was in van nuys then
Industrial Light magic when I first
started the guys who are doing the
visual
for that for Star Wars my friends that I
met at Chloe's Dennis Muren and Ken
Ralston were were shooting the special
effects and George came in and said do
you know anybody they can make a mask
because I knew I want to add some masks
to them to the cantina scene and they go
yeah we do so they called me in so I
went over to Val G & Avenue and George
on a flatbed editor showed me the
sequence as it existed and I was
flipping out and missing what a cool
idea to have this bar for the aliens you
know and go on let's do you know Stewie
do one that has Ike you know like that's
kind of like alien pirate that's got a
like alien parrot character and it's
nothing goes well we don't have any
money
you know it's like you know we've
already spent the money you know we
don't have a lot of money for this I
just want masks you know and I said well
I you know what I have a bunch of stuff
I made myself for fun that we can screw
in there but there's a devil guy that
one that I made that five years before
Star Wars you know there's a werewolf
guy in another guy with khlo' eyes I
made those before Star Wars I just said
you can use them I thought they were
gonna be stuck in the background you
know him but we did like the cantina
band you know the first on top top the
first aliens that you see almost all the
first days you see our lawns that we did
I think we did 30 and but what was great
is yeah that was one of the masks I made
before he's good yeah oh yeah that was
such a great scene too though you know
these are Stuart freeborn's things you
know but the thing that's great the
cantina band was never there
and when you see the movie you think
it's there and I've uses so many times
where I say can we shoot this like in
post-production that's the devil guy
yeah and these guys were the guys that
when the guys in this end the guys we so
you shot the alien band and post yes in
in Los Angeles in a by different people
at a different time and I've said to you
know I want to say to people let's can
we shoot this in post and because what
happens you know most directors don't
like dealing with this yet you know and
they'll put it off to the last shot of
the day and then it's like well you got
45 minutes and go but this is the money
shot right and I prepared four months
for this and you'll give me 45 minutes
to do this it's not right you know let's
shoot it in post-production
well that'll never work
imagine it's like did you see Star Wars
yeah you know the band that's in the
cantina yeah that was shot by different
people in a different country months
later did you know that no no it's like
you think they're there you hear the
music that they're playing through the
scene you know these are some of our
aliens those two guys the blue guys and
as is that werewolf and that was the
only one that looked like a mass well
yeah I mean I think it I think they all
looked like masks we made that guy and
that mask in the background was one of
mine that I had before too you know but
yeah great scene again it was a great
idea and people I did not make that one
that was on Stewarts um people think of
it fondly you know and it's more that
it's a great ideas and they work is
great yeah what was it was a great
conglomeration of cool characters all in
one bar and you know at the time I was
completely in unique and new things oh
yeah and but after that every movie
every space movie had a cantina scene
you know and and it's like American
world do every transformation after
American world was basically the same
transformation and they did the same
things you know and it happened on
thriller - you know I mean I because of
American Werewolf when Michael came to
John Landis to do thriller you know he'd
like American world he wanted to do he
wanted it to be a short film you didn't
want to call it a music video
mm-hmm and John contacted me and said
you know Michael Jackson wants to do
this American Werewolf like music video
you know for the song thriller which I
hadn't heard and it was like you know
Michael Jackson little Michael Jackson
Andy Jackson 5 but yeah you know he's
not called that anymore you know and so
he goes Johnson I'll send you a kiss at
it listen to it and get some ideas you
know so I and this was when we had the
Walkman you know and yeah I'd listen to
it with wine I had another one that I
would like like pre associated ideas
when I was listening you know and he was
like this I thought well these we came
up the idea doing these zombie dancers
and and I said well you know I'm sure
you're gonna hire the dancers way in
advance so they could learn the dance
because no they they there they only
need a couple of days so they hired him
like three days before we filmed anyone
I can't that doesn't give me time to
take life masks and do all the stuff
that I would do and he's obviously be
really cool you know so I said how about
if the first time bees you see are like
me and my crew because we already have
life masks we can start those today and
we can spin the time and making some
cool and so I'm in thriller coming out
of a crypt like this you know and and
all my crew basically are the first guys
that come out of the ground and break
their windows but the dancers I said
I'll figure out a way we can do them and
I because I had a number of life masks
of different people and small medium and
large male small medium large female and
we sculpted we kept pieces we called
like bandit masks they were kind of like
this around this area like abandoned you
know right run yeah it's like a raccoon
Mouse yeah and it didn't have the nose
on it because you know proportionately
you could get away with more mm-hmm so
we had different sculptures of small
medium large male small Milosz female
that we've just say okay you're a medium
male number two and we made these big
teeth that we could pop in their mouths
and put some denture lining material and
fit them so the dancer makeups were not
as good as the more featured make but
Michael in the upper left-hand corner
that one Jamie were the eyes yeah look
at that like that was excellent and
again we kept it that way when what
happened is the Dom bees after that
everybody was just doing pieces like
this I only did it like that because the
limitations I had but that was I mean
that was a rather really quick job and
very little money thriller was very
little money for me it turned I mean
they spent the money they had a lot of
cameras in the last summer filming but
it I was in working day and night every
day the way to get this stuff done and
John then surprised me with the making
of us roller on the day that Michael was
coming out for us to take his life
masked and make a cast of his face he
goes oh there's a camera crew here a
couple cameras saying what are you
talking about he goes I want to do a
making-of and I go I was gonna no no
it's like it always looks horrifying to
see if somebody have a life mask take
its Brian and I go I don't need and
Michael's really shy
I don't need we don't need this I don't
want this he goes shut up we're doing it
you know it's like fuck you know I'm not
happy about it but then so many people
have come up to me yeah and who are
makeup artists now and you go the reason
I'm a makeup artist cuz I saw the making
a thriller and it inspired me that to do
this you know and my stock answer is you
thought that if this idiot could do it I
can do it there was a time where music
videos were a new thing and then
thriller changed what a music video is
it was so huge it was a a world premiere
event that was on MTV and it's so hard
for kids today to understand what that
means but we were all like gathered
around the TV waiting for the Michael
Jackson Thriller world premiere and it
premiered and it changed what a music
video is yeah then all of a sudden it
became this film and it was really cool
cuz like Michael Jackson was this sweet
guy and he's on a date with this
beautiful girl and and next thing you
know he's a fucking werecat or whatever
he was was that supposed to be that like
well yeah I I he wanted to be a werewolf
isn't that you know I don't think he
should be a werewolf and I thought
something feline would be fit him better
you know and I originally did a like a
black panther and then I was afraid of
the black panther you know that I didn't
want him to be associated with a black
panthers you know what I mean the
political yeah yeah so I then became
more fantasy I gave it longer hair and
like white Steve you find his
transformation to the cat because it was
reminiscent in somewhat of a mirror of
American werewolf but cool and unique in
its own way I think oh we didn't we
didn't at the time - yeah I wasn't sure
what it was I was like it's not a cat
isn't a werewolf was it yeah well call
the world was sometimes people call the
cat is there yeah yeah I just you know
thought it was cool like Union no it was
definitely cool look whatever it was but
you know what happened I mean on trailer
was like work work work work work and
originally it was going to be my my crew
were going to be the guys that do the
makeups and they were all non-union and
it at the last minute became a union
production so I had to hire Union makeup
artist and there were men you to do the
dancers and many of them were people I
didn't know and there weren't a lot of
people that were good at this stuff
hmm huh yeah that's gonna give me a
little bladders in his hand there's
actually an American Werewolf hand in
here at one point I think oh really
yeah you know leftover heads yeah that's
a nail growing thing was from American
Werewolf and then you did a similar
thing with the ears and then he had the
whiskers yeah yeah it's like yeah he's
before his hair grows
yeah silly but when you look at that
like what is that yeah is that a cat
whatever it is it's cool yeah but he the
it was an amazing experience because I
know I was like it was really stressed
out the day that we were filming the
dancers and that was I had to make up
Michael as a zombie I had a number of
makeup errs I didn't even know and then
work before with before they were doing
other zombies and I'm running through
trailers going no no no like this you
know I've been making up Michael and
it's like ah man and we were filming in
Vernon downtown Los Angeles and next to
the farmer John meatpacking plays and
they just slaughtered the animals and it
had this weird smell in the process and
then the dance started and I all of a
sudden it just like this wave went over
me of just the stress went away and I
just was looking at what was having in
front of me you know what's gonna hold
my god look at this you know and and
people would pay money to see this and I
get to see this you know I saw this
roller dance happening when it was you
know for the first time there you know
when it was being filmed
how many times did they shoot it not
that many I don't think but there I
think there was six cameras on you know
um the whole street you know friend that
was filled with cameras and but the
other thing that was so cool about it
that was one of the dancer makeups that
Michael when we were doing him in
pre-production Michael did a a Motown
special that was on television where he
moon walked for the first time that
nobody had seen the moonwalk and I
didn't see it I was busy working and but
one of my crew who went home at night
and it recorded it and he goes you're
not gonna believe this is the same kid
that was in her makeup chair the other
day because Michael is very shy as well
really meek and quiet in person and he's
so dynamic onstage you know and and it
was he's like two different people I
mean when Michael's performing he's
incredible you know now he was a and I
mean to say he was unique is the biggest
understatement in the history of the
world yeah but this whole scene with him
when he becomes a zombie it was so
bizarre to like even the dancing was so
strange you know it was cool though oh
he's really cool and to see it live for
the first time you know out like cold
with it they don't do anything like this
anymore I mean really it doesn't happen
yeah well you know it's funny I like you
you've said a number times I try to
explain to my daughters let you know we
we had television but you I had a TV
Guide I would look at every page and try
to find when a monster movie is going to
be on and have to watch it then or I
could see it yeah and if I wanted to see
it again I would have to wait a year or
you know there wasn't an internet you
know and you know I had I had to go to
the library to find books on makeup
which there weren't very many you know
now you there's all these YouTube videos
I didn't have some you know and but it's
it's a different world I mean the
information wasn't is available and you
couldn't you know you couldn't just call
up let's see thriller yeah
now when you did the Wolfman was there a
push to do some sort of CGI version of
that was it did you have to like either
a discussion about how to do it I
expected that it would do it CGI because
everything at that time was basically
CGI and I had a friend that got a copy
of the script and I read it in a red
like a CGI thing hmm and I was actually
filming at Universal we were filming
some of the Norbit stuff at Universal
and I went to a a producer there that I
knew who was a visual effects producer
as well and I asked him if he knew
anything about the Wolfman you know
because I said I didn't love to do this
you know and that's one of the films
that made me do what I do you know and
and I said it was gonna be CG because no
actually they were talking about it
being a makeup and Inca will you put my
name in there then you know I would love
to do this so they the original director
wanted it to be a makeup and I thought
we were going to do transformation we
actually built stuff for a transfer me
it was a weird film in so many ways it
seemed like you know Benicio was great
to work with he wanted to he wanted to
be the Wolfman you know he's a monster a
real monster kid too you know Anthony
Hopkins was great you know III did it
with my friends David who else he
but III think we were the only people
that wanted to be working in a movie
called a Wolfman
I mean think everybody else was
embarrassed that they were working in a
movie called The Wolfman really yeah and
they would do things the production
manager called me into the office once
and said what what is this why are you
by buying all this hair what is this
hair for I go seriously why do you need
this hair and he had a big behind his
desk at a big sign said Wolfman and I
went and covered it up and cover up the
wolf park with my hands and go right now
we had this a man I'm gonna make him a
Wolfman and I need hair for that why do
you need hair cuz wolves have fur it's
like what the fuck I can't believe I'm
having this conversation with you you
know because what I mean do you need all
of that hair you know I mean what and
they like that through the whole movie
it's just so embarrassing you have to
talk to someone like that I know but
then I'll just let you do whatever you
do I know and you know I think people
who are in industry who have to deal
with this stuff all the time to think
that I never have to you know write it
happens all the time you know and it
seems like everybody has to yeah yeah
and but I mean it was very frustrating
but again Dave and Lou Elsie and I we we
had we'd worked day and night and when
everybody was gone we had the best time
you know we're gonna Wolfman movie you
know and when we first filmed the
sequence in the gypsy camp or this all
these gypsies mmm and fog and stuff is
like that's what was it was very
reminiscent of the old movies but like a
new version of the old movies yeah with
the fog and the gypsy camp and all that
jazz it was really similar to the
original launched Annie there was also a
junior yeah and he had kind of a hammer
film feel to it too you know and we and
Anthony Hopkins makeup was was you know
a little more curse the werewolf
Christopher not Christopher
really hot with was the name Oliver Reed
Melina um had that kind of feel to it
and and I mean like I said Benicio is a
real big fan of the horror films and and
we got along great in fact he would come
into the makeup trailer with old monster
magazines and that he bought on the
Internet and there he is and he would
quiz me on stuff you know I know what's
this I knew everything I knew it you
know everything on every page you know
and we became we connected we bonded
over that you know the scene where he
makes the transformation in the medical
theater uh-huh that was a great scene
it's all CG though is that all CG CG
oh it's basically it's based a lot on
ideas that I had you know because I I
mean what I said you know cuz they said
well we got to do the great
transformation like American Werewolf
and I said American Werewolf we had a
naked man who changed into a four legged
hound from hell right here we have
Benicio del Toro and we have Benicio
tutorial with some hair on his face you
know and some teeth right we can't the
changes aren't the same we can't stretch
out his body we can't write you know
well we wouldn't have that same kind of
feel so I said well how about if we do
things worse fingers twist and do
uncomfortable things and stuff like that
right but we actually made a lot of
stuff but it's so weird I mean like the
production we weren't even invited to
this set when they did the
transformation even though he had stuff
they didn't want you to they didn't want
me there why is that I don't know they
didn't want your input
you know I guess even though it's a lot
of the what's in there is based on some
animatics that I did and some drawings
and stuff but it was a really weird deal
I mean it's like we were the unwanted
children in that movie you know that's
so crazy for me to hear something like
that it's so it's stunning because I
would have assumed that in my eyes your
Hollywood royalty like you're the guy
who made American Werewolf in London
you're the guy who made so many these
incredible movies with makeup and
special effects I would think they'd be
pumped that you were there well yeah I
thought that too I know but it wasn't
the case but you know I mean I you know
something interesting when I read this
book
my career I complain too much about the
film industry and I shouldn't because
it's been really good to me I mean I
like I said it was my hobby and I made
it a decent living at it and I got
Awards for it and I got free food and
things you know and it is magic I mean
you you you it's like time traveling
like working on this movie when we're in
you know London
in areas that haven't changed since the
1800s and you have all these people and
period costumes it really is like your
time travel you know and you get to work
with some really amazing people yeah see
this is all CG a really well done CG is
really well done yeah and and Steve Begg
who was the visual effects supervisor
was a a really great guy and he was
really upset that we weren't able to do
this stuff as well but they think they
did a terrific job and I you know I like
CG to a degree I mean III like the fact
that it's another technique that we can
use to do things that we can't do in the
real world with rubber yeah right right
I just don't like that they do things
when we can do it you know and I think a
lot of it comes down to Oh before
American Werewolf I would have to try to
beg people to let me do something I mean
it was like can I put a mustache or and
a scar on this guy you know and after
American Werewolf I would get scripts
with stuffing and I had no idea how the
hell I was gonna do and I like crazy
crazy stuff but they they would say to
me what because they did a lot of
interviews after America more often they
said what is the material that changed
that allowed you to do the work that we
haven't seen before and I said I got
adequate time and adequate money and it
was the first time I had that and after
that I like when I did gremlins - I had
a year's prep but the problem is I need
answers a year before we start filming
because I need to make this stuff and
usually a directors on another movie
then and doesn't want you know
eventually after I hound them I'm try to
get an answer it will give me some kind
of answer which just to make me shut up
you know hmm
CG all that stuff comes in post the
film's already made you kind of cut it
together they start making the stuff but
this is obviously makeup
that is yeah so CG until transformation
till he's the werewolf and then when
he's aware of this was done in a
different day yeah well I mean they the
CG was done all imposed yeah right
but yeah him sitting in the chair was
Benny stealing the day and this is
that's actually the stunt double and so
sometimes when he was running he was
running on all fours yeah and on in leg
extensions and most of that stuff is
Spencer Wilding who was our stunt double
there was there are some shots of
close-ups this is Spencer the stunt
double yeah but that was what was weird
about is like he's running but he's got
kind of like dog legs
yeah yeah but he's running on two legs
yeah with dog legs a biped I get it
that's Venezia but it was it was a
hybrid you know of American Werewolf and
the original Wolfman yeah you know the
Wolfman had you know he said he stayed
on his balls of his feet you know he
didn't try to get that illusion of like
dog like oh yeah original one yeah yeah
and you know I it's so funny because I
walk like that as a kid though all the
time you know and it would do things and
so could Dave Elsie but when we tried to
get the stunt guys or even Benicio to do
it they couldn't do it we couldn't walk
on the throws on the balls of their feet
like that with their heels up you know
or not I don't know you know at any
second how come I can do it but it's
also something a skill I developed as a
child now when you see a film like that
and you say you know you think about all
the the difficulties that you had in
making it was there ever a film where
they let you just go crazy just do
whatever you wanted to do well pretty
much American Werewolf
yeah well that was the best one yeah
well that's and and again you know I
gremlins to which I did it was a film I
turned down numerous times my friend
Chris Chris can't speak Chris whale is
did the original gremlins and I didn't
basically want to copy Chris's work
right and I also know it was a big job a
lot of stuff and and they kept after me
Chris was unavailable I think he was
doing the fly and the Jeff Goldblum
first yeah which is Japanese man Jeff
was great he should want an Oscar
when the all-time great performance yeah
a lot of people forgot about that move
oh I know he's he's brilliant in that um
but the they said what can we do to
entice you to do this movie Michael let
me redesign the gremlins saw Michael I
would like to make them individual
characters Chris's version all the girls
were the same mold all the Hmong ways
were all the same mold
so you basically because you can't make
one puppet that does everything so you
have the you know this puppet you have
your hand and you have this puppet you
have some rods on you have this puppet
that does this but they could be
interchangeable for any any Mogwai or
any gremlin making them individual
characters means I had to have you know
six versions of each one you know so we
made hundreds of things but I said you
know if I can make them characters and
change the design some I'd be more
interested and then we came up with the
idea of doing the genetics lab where one
turns into a bat one turned into a
spider hmm one turns into a vegetable
gremlin but what was great about working
with Joe Dante I mean Joe is also a
monster fan you know monster kid guy so
we we could communicate in that in that
way you know we would say you know it's
like innovation Sossaman you know when I
was talking about okay like Barry
Sonnenfeld who I did men in black with I
said that - he he'd go yeah I never seen
a science fiction movie never saw any
science would he go I said I went to see
alien but I got too scared and left and
my crew on many black oh my god is gonna
be disaster you know and I was saying
you know I don't you know it could be a
really good thing he could make a really
unique film and not just base it on
other stuff yeah see you know and I
think men in black is a really great it
is yeah it's really and he was he was
terrific for it you know but at first it
was a little scary you know but Joe but
you know Joe is great and he's really
open to suggestions you know
and on the first gremlins they had a
suggestion box it's like what can we
have the girl Melissa do and people
would put things in there so you know we
could say how about if we do this how
might we do that
okay you know so it was it was a nice
collaboration you know and that was fun
so you have some fond memories oh no I
mean I have a lot of fun memories and
mostly it's in the pre-production time I
mean my crew
it is hard though to not concentrate
it's like you have to make a concerted
effort to not concentrate on the
annoyances and the negative parts yeah
and it is hard and especially when that
you get
every day yeah but the hours you know
people don't realize I mean a normal
film days a 12-hour day yeah but I you
know for me an average makeup is a
three-and-a-half hour makeup then you
have a twelve hour day then you have a
our removal time hmm
so they're very long days I spent most
of my career working 18 15 18 hour days
you know in 20 hour days and sometimes
all night you know yeah and all day just
to get this stuff done you know and
that's pre adderall yeah yeah and I you
know I'm surprised that I'm you know cuz
I'm gonna be 69 in like a month and I'm
surprised and still alive first of all
you know and and and able to walk and do
stuff you know when I think about the
days of standing on my feet all day hmm
all the stuff well what about the
chemicals that's the thing that I would
think it's a little scary yeah you know
and and we I mean I because of my
experience of like I said with a
polyurethane foam and yeah yeah I know
that you know this stuff is dangerous
and I also had one time we the paint
that I used to use to paint rubber it's
hard to get Robert to paint to stick to
rubber and I found out that on the
Creature from the Black Lagoon and they
made paint out of rubber cement and
Universal tinting colors and thinned it
with benzene and it was bond to rubber
so I used to paint my masks in my
bedroom with benzene which is a
carcinogen yes hmm atomizing it spraying
through an airbrush you know no spray
booth or anything he says I used to have
a five gallon drum of benzene that I'd
wash my hands off in oh my god and then
when I found out because they weren't
material safety data sheets like they
are now you know I found out how
dangerous this stuff was I became kind
of fanatical about you know my shop my
studio I had seven spray booths to take
the fumes away and and make sure it was
safe and I mean oh I had I think when
the safest shop in Hollywood with us
stuff because I didn't want to I don't
want to find out ten years down the line
and half my crew died because of some
dealt with me so
but yeah it so it's a little scary
especially in the old days when we
didn't know better right it's most
people now are pretty safe with this
stuff what was the last film he worked
on Maleficent not the one who just came
out but the the first one yeah and it
was interesting I I it came about
because a friend Tony gee who is Angie's
makeup artist does her beauty makeup all
the time she worked with me on first one
the Nutty Professor and then we did life
together and she was like the department
had on the Grinch Grinch Stole Christmas
and planted the Apes the planning Apes
that I did dealt with all the makeup
artists and um it was really great she's
a great beauty makeup artist but also a
really great effects makeup person and
she said to Angie you know oh and when
they were gonna do Maleficent she cuz
you have to get a Rick Baker he's the
guy to do this you know and he's got a
good aesthetic and he knows nothing when
to put stuff on and when not to and
knowing and I said Paula I don't know I
don't women are the hardest to make up
you know the especially if you do an age
your makeup you know I don't think any
woman must look old and I've done some
films where we do the most incredibly
subtle little thing and then the actress
won't want doesn't want to come out of
the trailer because they say they look
like a burn victim you know stuff you
know or in tears and and I said you know
ie Angie wanted appliances he wondered
rubber on her face and I was thinking I
not I don't think she should have you
know I said I think we can do it with
the horns and maybe it's just ears you
know right but she had this very
specific idea that she wanted these
angular sharp mmm she's you know so I
mean the very first thing I did I did it
as I said let me just think about it and
do a design what I think it should be
mm-hmm I did as a design and then I met
with Angie she came to my studio uh-huh
which is now a storage facility the and
she brought a couple of her kids in in
like a nanny kind of person in paparazzi
follow to read we closed the gates and
we're talking and
she's telling me what she wants and one
of her kids says to the nanny person
niggas I want a coke in angie was
mid-sentence talking to me and she went
please yeah and it really I like that
she was teaching her kids manners you
know and that kind that kind of sold me
right there you know it's like okay
she's a mom too you know and and she is
incredibly beautiful to look at you know
and she's pretty persuasive in that
respect you know yeah they don't get any
prettier yeah they just get different
yeah but I mean ah yeah well you did a
great job in keeping that beautiful face
but adding just a little bit of
weirdness yeah demonic weirdness with
the cheeks yeah and again with the horns
I was saying you know maybe this is a
really good case of doing CG horns and
having them trapped onto her because
when you have something that's that much
authority it's well we made a really
lightweight
it was incredibly lightweight and we
spent a lot of time developing these
lightweight horns that could be
removable so she didn't have to wear
them all the time right so they removed
like an appoint about this far up off of
her wig so I thought if they decide they
don't like it we can take them off and
they'd be a good strategy for CG yeah
but they she she wanted him and she wore
them but so we you know we spent a lot
of time trying to make those really
light what about the wings the wings I
didn't do I don't I think I'm not sure
how they did that I didn't go to
location on the filming Tony G made her
up and I had a really great Dutch guy
who was a fan named our Ian Titan who
did who put the appliances on with Tony
G and represented me on the set what is
that picture with the American Werewolf
with the hand stick that's a Mike Hill
yeah Mike Hill does these cool of like
wax figures but they're silicone so he
did me and he did me as a younger man
which was when the worst ones he's done
this is at the Academy for something but
yeah he I gave him the molds actually
from American Werewolf for the hands and
some of the stuff but he does he does
these great figures and unfortunately i
die and i think even grease the one they
did of me was one of the one the less
successful looks good well it looks good
but it looks a little grim - and i
part of that was my fault though he
wanted to do me smiling and I go you
know what I'm working I'm like this is
my concentration face you know and but I
sat for him and he had life cast and
everything and but he does some
brilliant stuff what ever happened to
the original molds and although the
original masks and stuff from American
Werewolf in London the original
sculpture of the wolf
well that sculpture gets destroyed
basically you make the mold I have one
of the original head still
I mean foam rubber is is basically the
SAP of a rubber tree that you put
chemicals in to make a cure and you whip
air into it to make it foam and you put
another chemical in to make it congeal
and you bake it in the oven but because
it's an organic material to decomposes
and rots oh really
yeah and it will last through a film but
it usually doesn't last years but it
does the American well the stunt head
the one that I killed Griffin with on
the moors and then go through the big
daily I have and it's hard as a rock it
turns to like I call like grain crackers
and if you touch it hard it'll crumble
into dust Wow
mines it's all hard like that but it's
not even people don't touch it you know
so what does Pat McGee make these out of
the one our wolf is I think it's
probably slip rubber and polyurethane
foam and that lasts a lot longer but it
will decompose Oh order another one yeah
well you get them to do they keep it out
of sunlight and keep it out yeah you
know I mean he doesn't get out of the
studio yeah that's good he'll he'll last
a long time you know I mean I I have Bob
Burns who this guy that I met when I was
young has some of my original mess that
I made when I 13 oh wow and they are
still supple you can still move them I
don't know how that that rubber has
lasted all that time that's pretty
incredible a long time when anyone comes
here one of the first things you want to
do is take a picture with the world that
literally is like one of the front like
everybody and their brother has a photo
like posing next to Wolfe retain the
Wolves biting their head or pretend
they're having sex with the wall people
from behind what I think I should get
residuals I probably this little piece
yeah well taste something free cokes
nothing
but that I mean that thing is it's if
you had to go through like all the more
are the most iconic monsters in the
history of films I mean you're you're in
the top two or three I mean it's it's
right there with all of them that that
what werewolf was like my god I mean
it's absolutely one of the most iconic
monsters ever cooked someone just on my
on my Instagram just posted a picture of
a tattoo a beautiful tattoo of the
werewolf oh yeah so many people have
them one guy did a cover-up tattoo that
was incredible the werewolf bday it's
funny to have that werewolf I have hairy
on people I've got the Grange yeah and
some of the stuff Harry and the
Hendersons yeah yeah that's another one
oh and that's one of the films I think
still I mean when people ask me what my
favorite one is I say Harry because I I
can look at that film to date I think it
holds up perfectly fine the only thing I
think I would change is I would make his
teeth a little more translucent yeah but
that was a challenging movie because he
had to communicate and just fly his
visual expressions right and and carry
the movie you know and I think he did
and I think it works quite well was
there is there a movie that stands out
as being the most frustrating like the
end result probably you know I mean
they're all frustrating to a degree you
know what I don't know if there's one
particular one I mean I did and I don't
consider this my film I was approached
by Bob Weinstein to do a werewolf movie
called cursed that West Craig was gonna
direct and I basically turned it down
and there wasn't a lot of time and Bob
used my own words against me apparently
on a on a DVD of American where I said
I'd love to have the opportunity to do a
transformation again and do it knowing
what I know now with the crew that I
have now right Nicholas I'm giving you
that you said that you know so I said to
him the only way I would do this is if
you don't have an opinion and Wes
doesn't have an opinion you just let me
make what I think is best for this film
that's the only way I can make it cool
in the time that you have I can't play
that
change this change that game you know
absolutely the horse that's not the case
and say that and yeah it was like change
this change that change that and it was
just like you know and you almost have
to have a clause in the contract that if
they do fuck with you at all you could
just leave and get paid I've done that
you know in in one-one contract but yeah
it turned out the they started the film
before they really had a script and it
was oh yeah it happens all the time and
they it was just a mess and this haven't
heard of it first you know what's good
you didn't hear but I'm surprised I'm
even mentioning it because it did they
shut the film down and I went okay and I
said but we were we were doing some
really cool transformation stuff and it
wasn't quite done and I said listen if
you ever think the films gonna pick up
again if you can keep a number of my
people on for another month we can have
this transformation stuff or put it in a
box we'll be ready to go said if they
disperse now it's going to be like
starting again because necessarily get
the same people you know right you know
I know just put everything in a box you
open to ship it to us where you know if
we start up again you know we'll figure
it out they started up again I didn't do
it I was on something else someone else
took over then they changed everything
that I made they didn't use a lot of
what I made but the film has a single
card opening credits as Rick Baker on it
and I I spoke with the Weinstein ago I
don't want credit for this film is not
my film this isn't my work anymore but
it would help them to have you on it
yeah yeah yeah so I mean I found that
frustrating you know but you know again
I have no right to complain about this
stuff they don't do a lot of monster
movies anymore and the number of
werewolf movies you can kind of count
them on one hand
right I mean the anthology stretch here
we have the howling of course you have
America werewolf you have the earlier
films but this it's you know and then
you have those I don't consider them
werewolf movies those what are the ones
with the lady there underworld beckons
do underworld yeah yeah those are kind
of but what they're fun to watch Kate
Beckinsale in a suit it's pretty fucking
hot but
they're just kind of wack the movies are
kind of why the vampires are wack it's
like I don't buy any what you're selling
I don't think he's a real vampires I'm
not scared I don't think that's a
werewolf get the fuck out of here
yeah well I'm more old-school yeah
horror movie guy you know I'm not a big
slasher movie guy you know I mean now
again I I don't like I mean I can't I
can't watch those fights that you know
Zemin UFC fight oh no I have a one of my
crew eddying shoutout to any great guy
yeah
Eddie was the priest uh D with all the
Gracie's okay and he was saying hey you
gotta watch this Rick and I mean these
guys hit each other in the face with
elbow and I know it's not for me you
know and people will send me because
they think I like this stuff pictures oh
look fell down cut my head you know I I
pass out and I cut myself you know
really yeah yeah yeah yeah I I mean fake
gore is one thing you know but I I think
it's bad that you know a movie you know
when you know Halloween and and Friday
the 13th and it just became what's the
most graphic way we can kill a teenager
right and people become when you see you
know a guy with him you know get shoved
a knife shoved a design that people I
use like cheer alright that seems wrong
to me
you know yeah the desensitization you
know you should be repulsed by this
stuff right and I mean I you know I
don't know but it's so fun I mean people
would think it's funny and kind of
ironic coming from someone like you
who's made these insane monster films
like American Werewolf in London we're
just ripping guys heads off Piccadilly
Circus monster gore you know and it's
something like you know if it's a zombie
killing
you're killing zombie that's okay you
know that that's not real you know right
but just killing a person it another
person killing a person in a graphic way
I'm not fond of you know so I don't like
you know I mean I like you I call them
monster movies more than Bryce you don't
need to yeah and you know I mean that
Charles Laughton Quasimodo I mean it's
brilliant
mm-hmm yes it's a brilliant makeup yeah
1939 right and you know it's a perfect
makeup on a perfect actor
no Charles Ilan was great in that movie
and you feel for him you know you feel
further Frankenstein's monster you know
those movies just don't they're so few
and far between today like I see a real
Frankenstein type movie will you fond of
the Robert De Niro version of
Frankenstein you know when I heard they
were gonna do that film I thought I got
to do this you know no and I like I said
I don't have an agent I have a lawyer
that makes my deals that I ended up you
have to they give you a contract you
don't understand you know right um and
he I said do you know anybody is
involved with this because you know can
you put in a put my name in the Hat you
know and they didn't seem to be
interested and when I saw the film I I
was kind of glad I didn't do it I wasn't
yeah and I also it was disappointed I
thought how cool they got Robert De Niro
and not just some big stunt guy right I
know yeah cuz you know Karloff was a
good actor I yeah - and then eventually
you know when it turned into the clean
strange who was bigger and stuff who was
still kind of cool Frankenstein but it
wasn't Karloff you know I thought great
that they have an actor you know but I
was so disappointed and when I saw it I
didn't think what he did was amazing at
all and and the design it was a lot of
work and I thought it was well done but
it didn't have the impact that that
Karloff right yeah that's right
expression yeah and and you know and
it's something it's very much I when I
was a kid I did a makeup thinking well
he's pieced together out of a bunch of
different people should be lots of scars
into different colors and things you
know but it's you need a certain
silhouette and something that just
catches your eye you know and and I
didn't think that one did pull up that
vent the image of Robert De Niro as
Frankenstein and you should pull up the
Porsche car light at the same time Boris
Karloff one I mean that was the first
and that's iconic
yeah and again the design if you think
about it doesn't make sense you know why
does he have a flat head in right why is
that bolts on his back yeah well that
makes more sense because that's hard
yeah that on the left I think that's a
test or something that looks a different
to me
mm-hmm yeah and again it does kind of
make sense when you think of as a man
that's pieced together a different part
right but why they piece in his face
together I know I'm like what you know
all right because Boris Boris Karloff
wasn't that pieced you know it was that
the head was very bizarrely yeah with
that head and you know in in the stuff
you read that Jack Pierce said and press
at the time was you know i Frankenstein
wasn't a trained surgeon he would take
the easiest route to take the brain out
the top of his head by cutting the
topics head off opening like a box yeah
and putting him you know new brain and
closing it back up
we're like a box but but it still
wouldn't be flat yeah you would to put
the skull back on it maybe be an eighth
of an inch shorter you know how about
Frankenstein's bride she was still hot I
know was that Nefertiti crazy hair yeah
but she was still hot is that the
original Frankenstein yeah that's the
Edison Frankenstein and again he has
kind of a flat head so I think yeah yeah
he's kind of goofy-looking but yeah
Carla Carla face was just so perfect for
it you know and I didn't know there was
that many Frankenstein so the other one
what does that one drink
whether it's Christopher Lee from
crankenstein right and it's uh what's a
Young Frankenstein Oh young Frank yes
and Herman Munster on the bottom yeah
the monsters are cool yeah but it is
kind of funny that Herman Munster is
just a ripoff for Frankenstein well he's
supposed to be well he's supposed to be
though and you know I mean yeah that's
why I just like Dracula yeah sure and
Eddie's kind of like a little Wolfman
yeah yeah yeah I remember it TV Guide
when before this came on the air but
they talked about the new shows that
were coming out you know this is in the
60s and this is when the big monster
craze happened and I you know I was all
over it inside there's gonna be a
Frankenstein guy on TV you know and it
was a great time for somebody like me
you know and then just soaked it all in
and
what is the impediment like it seems
like people love those movies when they
come out why don't they make more of
those movies you know well first of all
the Wolfman that I did wasn't very
successful yeah it didn't make a lot of
money that was stopped in production at
one point that was reshot they reshot a
bunch of it yeah well we came back for
reshoots and again this is same thing it
movies called The Wolfman right they
call me up and go we're gonna do some
reshoots in three weeks we want you to
build suits for two stuntmen because
we're gonna do this Quadra petting which
wasn't in the film originally and I said
in three weeks and I said remember when
we did the Wolfman we set up a shop in
London that took like two months to set
up you know all the molds are somewhere
in London I have no idea where they are
you've got him in storage somewhere said
we had found her crew we did the whole
thing I go there's no way I can do it in
three weeks I said what do we filming
they said well the fight at the end in
the house and all that I said well the
sets gonna take a while to put back
together oh you know no we started that
three months ago oh and I went so you're
giving me three weeks to make the
wolfman for this reshoot and you knew
about it for three months you know it's
like you know and if they would have
called me even a week sooner it was a
time when everybody was out of work it
was kind of a dry time but the you know
week before they called me a whole bunch
of shows started everybody was busy I
couldn't find a crew you know it's like
coming so how'd you wind up doing it
working day and night and I got my
friends Dave and Lou Elsie again and I
found a couple guys that could kind of
do something with his stuff and and we
pulled it off you know but it was I mean
I seriously was working day night got on
a plane flew to London got off the plane
made up inicio and another trailer we
had people I hadn't worked with before
making up the stunt double I mean it was
like we have to do this because Emily
Blunt is going to be doing Gulliver's
Travels she's only available for two
days so we have to film though so I get
off the plane makeup and ecl stunt
doubles made up everybody's looking good
I walk out to whoever filming and
they're filming the stunt double in
silhouette and this is again there's
like video village where there's an army
producer seating in chairs looking at
the monitor and I went over to him I
said okay you have to explain this to me
and they go what right can I go why are
we filming this fucking stunt double
when Emily Blunt Benicio del Toro Hugo
Weaving are sitting in their trailer we
only have Emily Blunt for two nights or
filming in the summer in England it gets
dark at 10 o'clock it gets light at 4
o'clock in the morning it's going to be
light in two hours this is one of the
two days that we have Emily Blunt why
are we not filming her and they all
looked at each other like oh yeah why
are we not filming her whether must
there must be a reason you know the
movie was cursed
what isn't John Landis his son involved
in some sort of a remake of American
Werewolf he it's been announced that he
was going to do that I don't know if
it's ever gonna happen those things
happen all the time you know why they
announce it man it's just yeah Thank You
Ramon to Toro every other week there's
some film that he's gonna make that yeah
and some of them happen someone don't
you know but he's a big fan of monster
film yes and he again I think he's he
was a part of the strain wasn't he film
yeah and and I met Guillermo first he
was a makeup artist he used to be a
makeup artist in Mexico and he was a
Dick Smith student and a fan you know
dick Smith fan and dick introduced me to
him and Guillermo came to my studio as a
fanboy a makeup artist first and they
did Hellboy with him with him and I was
in the strain he has me killed by one of
the Strigoi and strain the strain starts
off great the book does the books really
good for like three-quarters of the way
through and then it seems like they just
kind of tried to finish it hmm you know
it's like very compelling in the
beginning it's like an interesting
storyline like okay I see what's going
on I'm not much of a reader and kind of
dyslexic
do you listen to books on tape I know it
doesn't work from either oh really yeah
I always say have too many voices in my
head but I when I'm when I'm working I
mean I have a real hard time you like if
you do a red carpet thing and these
people talk in any other side
it's short-circuits my brain right and
they asked me a question and I'm just
hearing these other people and I words
don't want to come out of my mouth you
know and it's kind of that way when I'm
working and I think part of it like I
said it was an only child
mm-hmm I learned working in a room by
myself Brian in quiet you know Brian I
like it that way I mean I if I sculpt or
paint I listen to music but if I do
stuff on the computer I'll do a lot of
designs on the computer and stuff and I
do some computer animation stuff for fun
I can't have any other hmm sounds and
stuff yeah you justify need to be
focused if I you know my wife knows this
very well if I'm trying to answer any
email and she's like talking to me I
just totally screw it up I mean hi your
brain just doesn't work that well I did
a book signing the other night and if
people are talking when I'm signing my
name I wrote I wrote the prayer is a
person had spelled her name and then
they said they were seeing something
else and I screwed up their book oh okay
mom I've written my name wrong in the
book there's a picture some drawings I
did as a kid and one I did a pen-and-ink
of Dracula and I wanted to be because it
was pen and ink and I couldn't erase it
I you know got out Famous Monsters to
make sure I spelled Dracula right and
very carefully he was looking at the
letters and writing an opinion ink it
says Drac Lila
and I did a painting from my wife this
kind of romantic hold a painting you
know it was for Valentine's Day and I
wanted it I didn't know how to spell
Valentine so I looked it up and I very
carefully painted Valentine time so
again thank God that my career choice
worked out because I couldn't work in an
office and I'm sure I'd be a homeless
guy no I mean my brain just doesn't work
like a normal person well but it would
the way it does work is wonderful the
way your brain ten focus on the things
that you really love and you figure out
how to how to get it to focus correctly
just shut the music off just be alone
yeah it surprised me that I can do that
you know in
and and I really get in the zone I
really focus on what I'm doing and to me
I mean the funny thing is I mean my I
think I started saying this before I was
talking about not wanting to be a
businessman and stuff and people are
always surprised that I'm hands-on still
you know a lot of other people who have
for example Stan Winston who was great
and did some great stuff and was great
for the makeup industry and and and
helped advance the state of the art was
a businessman more than a hands-on guy
he hired people to do the work and he
had a good eye and he would contribute
stuff but he rarely sculpted the stuff I
tried to sculpt the stuff I design the
stuff you know I'm in and I'm always
surprised when people go I paint and
sculpt and do all these things you know
and and when people see one of my
paintings they go you can paint you know
I'm just like they're shocked that I can
paint and I go you can sculpt you know I
have a there's a bronze gorilla at the
hell Izu as a sculpture that I did and
people go you can sculpt it's part of
what I do no no that werewolf came from
yeah you know but yeah I don't know what
I was going with that but yeah I I you
think that there's ever a project that
could come up that could tempt you into
coming out of retirement if somebody
listens to you on this podcast and
realizes that a lot of people fuck with
you while you worked and said Rick we
could do something amazing just one more
you know when I first retired I would
have said yes I mean I was leaving it
open that I said well I'll maybe do
designs or consult you know I'm having
way too much fun doing my own thing you
know I mean I I still probably have the
remains of my Halloween makeup you know
Halloween is a big thing in my family
mm-hmm I'm so sorry they didn't send you
a copy of the book it's gone I'll get it
don't worry I get it up put it on the
Instagram oh it's not so much about that
I just say if you're a fan I think
you're like oh I am a feminine way by
the response that I mean it's awesome
when people I mean they're loving it and
it's known it's like 250 bucks you know
but it's weighs 17 pounds it's too vile
and with 2,000 pictures in it up from
birth basically in my last film and
beyond you know in
in my retirement but I don't know where
I was going with that what you asked me
well we were talking about possibly
coming out oh yeah mate you were saying
how much fun you're having right now no
I I seriously doubt that anything would
we get me back well that's great to hear
well cuz it's not great you know I'd
love it if you did another movie but
it's great to hear that you're having
such a good time
well you know anything say um when I
watched Breaking Bad mmm
and Bryan Cranston you know is such a
great actor but I said you know he would
make a great lunch Haney if they ever
did a remake of man of a thousand faces
which was the story of lon chaney
he would be a perfect person you know
besides being a great actor and my wife
so me and I went to a Comic Con and went
to a panel that they had on Breaking Bad
and and we went back in I met Bryan and
Vincent and I said that to him you know
hmm
you know and I don't know maybe if that
happened you know I I don't think
anybody would go see that film now and
how many people have no lon chaney is
you know you know but he to be able to
recreate some of those makeups on and
after like that you know if it was the
right people but again I I realized you
know I mean death became a more real
thing to me when my parents died and I
have friends that were younger than me
that are dead now on my favorite crew or
my best guys and we just recently passed
54 or something um and I know there's an
end in sight and I know you know I've
got arthritis my I've got cataracts I
there's a limited time that I have left
to do the things I want to do and I want
to do what I want to do you know what I
mean and I don't want the frustration in
the stress beautiful yeah beautiful look
you already did it one of the most
amazing movies ever I mean you know if I
died today which I hope I don't I mean I
would be happy without accomplish and
that was another thing with the book I
mean when you see it laid out there in
800 pages you know saying well I made a
lot of shit my time you know yeah I've
made a lot of stuff and and and I'm
proud of what I made you know I mean you
do the best you can and the
circumstances and I fight one of the
things
that I realized when I read the book to
which a Cameron publishing who did the
book in and Jonathan Rinzler who wrote
it who did he interviewed me a lot and
he also went back to old articles and
all things at the time and did a really
nice job of weaving the story together
but when I read it I thought God you
know what a pain in the ass I am but I
fight for what I think is right for
example the Grinch How the Grinch Stole
Christmas they wanted me to paint Jim
Carrey green and that was it you know
and it was like well I mean I think they
wanted to Sahara too you know but right
but it couldn't come on you know it's
not called how the green Jim Carrey sold
Christmas all right Grainger's don't
Christmas yeah Grinch you know so I did
like I do many times on myself like I
did a Wolfman I make myself up but I
films himself in his show so I made
myself up what I thought the Grinch
would look like I film some stuff cut it
together I shot him good you guys this
is cooler than that green Jim Carrey I'm
sorry you know and then gone well it
doesn't look like Jim Carrey and go no
because it's on me gonna go but again
it's not the green Jim Carrey you know
right and it's it seems to me it should
be this character not just you know yeah
I fought and fought and fought and I
ended up doing a thing where I decided
to use the internet to help me get my
point across so there was a internet
movie site at the time that was popular
in and I knew the guy who ran it was I
was a fan and I said can you say that
you saw this test that I did and the
guys at Universal were making a big
mistake you know and just let the fans
chime in so there was like thousands are
responsible what the hell is wrong with
these idiots that are run in the movie
studios that shouldn't I don't want to
see green Jim Carrey I want to see a
grand show so like two weeks before we
started filming me they changed because
of this well and I had sent you know I
only sent the copy of my test to Brian
Grazer and Ron Howard and Ron's going
how did this guy get hold of this copy
of the attack long I don't know I only
sent it to you and and Brian no and I'm
gonna didn't let him know what I did at
the time now I don't care because it
came it's I think the movies better for
it you know sure
and in fact even at an Oscar party one
of the executives the studio came up to
me and said you know thank you for for
doing the Grinch in and for arguing with
us cuz you were the decision was right
it was definitely right he turned him
into the Grinch he really was the Grinch
but I thought I was gonna get hit by a
meteor or something this is not an
executive never tells you that stuff you
know I know but I again I mean I I fight
because it's my work and if my names on
it I want it to be of a certain quality
you know and it's not easy to get it
done that way you know and and it's part
of the battle you know but it's also
part of the frustration you know so no I
only have to fight with myself you know
beautiful listen man thank you very much
for coming here it's been an honor and
really I was really looking forward to
this as a real treat for me to get to
sit down and talk to you thank you so
much I'm glad we do anybody has an
America more open their Lobby can't be
bad guy thank you Rick thank you she ate
it my pleasure bye everybody
[Music]
[Applause]